---
layout: ajax
title: Day-Z (ARMA II mod)
category: review
color: "196,217,241"

review-developer: Bohemia Interactive
review-platform: PC
review-length: 5+ hrs
review-rating: Worth trying if you're a dedicated PC player (plus it’s free!)
---

{% include review.html %}

A few issues back, I reviewed The Walking Dead, commending it for its entertaining storytelling. Staying on the zombie theme, yet taking a completely different tack, this week sees the review of DayZ, an open-world and frankly brutal take on the zombie genre. Where The Walking Dead can be considered a great example of interactive narration, DayZ is nothing short of a social experiment, providing a novel take on the saturated genre.

Devised by New Zealand soldier Dean Hall, the game is built upon the true-to-life army game, ARMA II. Continuing this focus on realism, DayZ is extremely punishing. A single bite from a zombie, a minor fall or an untreated wound will all spell certain death. Additionally, players need to keep hydrated and fed for fear of fainting or going into shock, while also looking for shelter and weapons as a way of protecting themselves against the wandering hordes. Through this comes the most interesting aspect of the game: other players.

The game is only available in a multiplayer mode, meaning you'll find yourself inhabiting the fictional island of Chernarus with nearly 60 other people. Supplies are tight and the frailty of your character is very much apparent, so most players are hostile, taking a kill-or-be-killed approach. The victor gains loot, while the other player is left to start from scratch on a random piece of beach.

In an amusing example of how players have taken to this scenario, one used a bicycle to lure a pack of zombies into other players, using the bell to sound their demise. In other cases, players have teamed up, with one group setting up a secure trading area which frequently comes under attack by a similarly organised group of bandits. Often a group recruits players to their ‘community of survivors’ by collecting potential inhabitants in a bus before making them fight to the death.

Through its unconstrained, objectiveless and confrontational nature, the game does more to explore the nature of humans and our response to social decay than any other zombie game or film out there. The game illustrates the way in which the provision of the building blocks of play and enough freedom can lead to a truly innovative game experience. Even during its more routine moments (like when you're scouring between buildings in the hope of finding a way in) this feels like the most authentic zombie experience out there.

That said, do not expect it to be a refining gameplay experience. The controls feel pretty clunky and the game features a number of glitches, including the ability of zombies to pass through doors. However, with work already underway to convert this into a standalone game, this is definitely one for which it’s worth keeping an eye out.
